src/content/blog/step-by-step-binary-search-implementation-in-javascript.md, before:

---
title: "Step-by-Step Guide to Implementing Binary Search in JavaScript"
excerpt: "In this blog post, I explore the creative and philosophical aspects of coding in web development, comparing it to artistic expression and considering its impact on the digital landscape and human experience."
publishDate: "2023-07-09T16:39:36.050Z"
image: "/assets/images/posts/code-canvas.jpg"
category: "thoughts"
author: "abhinay thakur"
tags: [webdev, thoughts, coding, essay]
---

![Writing Less, Achieve More](/assets/images/posts/code-canvas.jpg)

<p class="first-letter:text-5xl first-letter:font-medium">
Binary search is a powerful algorithm used to efficiently search for a target element in a sorted array. In this blog post, we will explore Binary Search Implementation, where we will dive into the problem description, discuss the solution approach, provide code examples, and explain the implementation details.
</p>

## Problem Description
The requirement is to implement the binary search algorithm iteratively. Given a sorted array and a target element, our goal is to determine whether the target is present in the array and return its index if found.

## Solution Approach
The binary search algorithm operates by repeatedly dividing the search space in half, discarding the half that cannot contain the target element. To implement it iteratively, we initialize two pointers, left and right, to the start and end indices of the array, respectively. We then enter a loop where we calculate the middle index as (left + right) / 2 and compare the element at the middle index with the target. Based on the comparison, we adjust the left and right pointers accordingly until we find the target or determine that it is not present.

## Code and Sample Results

```javascript
function binarySearch(array, target) {
  let left = 0;
  let right = array.length - 1;

  while (left <= right) {
    let mid = Math.floor((left + right) / 2);

    if (array[mid] === target) {
      return mid; // Target found, return the index
    } else if (array[mid] < target) {
      left = mid + 1; // Target is in the right half
    } else {
      right = mid - 1; // Target is in the left half
    }
  }

  return -1; // Target not found
}

const array = [2, 5, 8, 12, 16, 23, 38, 56, 72, 91];
const target = 23;
const result = binarySearch(array, target);
console.log(`Index of ${target} in the array: ${result}`);
```

## Output

```
Index of 23 in the array: 5
```

### Code Explanation
We start by defining the `binarySearch` function, which takes an array and a target as parameters. Inside the function, we initialize the `left` and `right` pointers to the start and end indices of the array. We enter a while loop that continues until `left` becomes greater than `right`, indicating that the target is not present. Inside the loop, we calculate the middle index using integer division and compare the element at that index with the target. Based on the comparison, we adjust the `left` and `right` pointers accordingly. If the target is found, we return the index; otherwise, we return -1 to indicate that the target is not present in the array.

## Conclusion
In this blog post, we explored Binary Search Implementation. We discussed the problem description, and the iterative approach to solving it, provided a JavaScript code implementation, and demonstrated its usage with sample results. By understanding and mastering binary search, we can efficiently search for elements in sorted arrays, saving time and resources.

Commit message:

fix: migrated new blog posts from medium

src/content/blog/step-by-step-binary-search-implementation-in-javascript.md, after:

---
title: "Step-by-Step Guide to Implementing Binary Search in JavaScript"
excerpt: "Binary search is an efficient algorithm for finding a target element in a sorted array. Let’s explore its implementation in JavaScript."
publishDate: "2023-05-26"
image: "/assets/images/posts/binary-search-mini.jpg"
category: "thoughts"
author: "abhinay thakur"
tags: [webdev, thoughts, coding, essay]
---

<figure class="text-center text-xs -mx-32">
  <img src="/assets/images/posts/binary-search.jpg" alt="PS4 laying on a table" />
  <figcaption>
    Photo by <a target="_blank" href="https://unsplash.com/@pankajpatel?utm_content=creditCopyText&utm_medium=referral&utm_source=unsplash">Pankaj Patel</a> on <a target="_blank" href="https://unsplash.com/photos/monitor-displaying-indexhtml-codes-_SgRNwAVNKw?utm_content=creditCopyText&utm_medium=referral&utm_source=unsplash">Unsplash</a>
  
  </figcaption>
</figure>

<p class="first-letter:text-5xl first-letter:font-medium">
Binary search is a powerful algorithm used to efficiently search for a target element in a sorted array. In this blog post, we will explore Binary Search Implementation, where we will dive into the problem description, discuss the solution approach, provide code examples, and explain the implementation details.
</p>

## Problem Description
The requirement is to implement the binary search algorithm iteratively. Given a sorted array and a target element, our goal is to determine whether the target is present in the array and return its index if found.

## Solution Approach
The binary search algorithm operates by repeatedly dividing the search space in half, discarding the half that cannot contain the target element. To implement it iteratively, we initialize two pointers, left and right, to the start and end indices of the array, respectively. We then enter a loop where we calculate the middle index as (left + right) / 2 and compare the element at the middle index with the target. Based on the comparison, we adjust the left and right pointers accordingly until we find the target or determine that it is not present.

## Code and Sample Results

```javascript
function binarySearch(array, target) {
  let left = 0;
  let right = array.length - 1;

  while (left <= right) {
    let mid = Math.floor((left + right) / 2);

    if (array[mid] === target) {
      return mid; // Target found, return the index
    } else if (array[mid] < target) {
      left = mid + 1; // Target is in the right half
    } else {
      right = mid - 1; // Target is in the left half
    }
  }

  return -1; // Target not found
}

const array = [2, 5, 8, 12, 16, 23, 38, 56, 72, 91];
const target = 23;
const result = binarySearch(array, target);
console.log(`Index of ${target} in the array: ${result}`);
```

## Output

```
Index of 23 in the array: 5
```

### Code Explanation
We start by defining the `binarySearch` function, which takes an array and a target as parameters. Inside the function, we initialize the `left` and `right` pointers to the start and end indices of the array. We enter a while loop that continues until `left` becomes greater than `right`, indicating that the target is not present. Inside the loop, we calculate the middle index using integer division and compare the element at that index with the target. Based on the comparison, we adjust the `left` and `right` pointers accordingly. If the target is found, we return the index; otherwise, we return -1 to indicate that the target is not present in the array.

## Conclusion
In this blog post, we explored Binary Search Implementation. We discussed the problem description, and the iterative approach to solving it, provided a JavaScript code implementation, and demonstrated its usage with sample results. By understanding and mastering binary search, we can efficiently search for elements in sorted arrays, saving time and resources.
